some things in the sciences are
difficult to prove talking about certain
areas of theoretical physics if you're
talking about getting precise dates for
geological events we're dealing with
hundreds of thousands of years very hard
to pin down some things are going to be
difficult for us the claim that
meditation the claim that Buddhist
meditation improves cognitive function
why would that be difficult proof why
why would it be mysterious why do people
like sam harris who are self-styled
skeptics and at the same time
self-styled buddhist gurus very real
sense
he's a buddhist guru go ahead and read
his PhD thesis who don't believe me go
ahead and read the book that was adapted
from his PhD it is if you don't believe
me he's a true believer and he wants you
to be a true believer in put us in
meditation too why would that be
difficult the proof it's not a
mysterious claim if i claim that i have
a set of visualization exercises that
will help you perform arithmetic
functions more rapidly there have been
many claims that kind of many of them
have improvement there's certain
exercises where they teach children to
use an abacus and then walk them through
a series of mental exercises where
they're visualizing how to compute
certain types of equations in their head
there are mental visualization exercises
that help people process numbers better
in their own mind that help people do
things in their minds eye that otherwise
they might require a pen and paper to to
figure out that kind of numerical
operation it's not hard to prove it's
not her to prove it's not a disparate
there's a type of cognitive function we
can measure why is it that for sam
harris a specialist in this field
someone who wrote his PhD thesis on this
precise topic why is it hard for sam
harris to prove that buddhist meditation
improves cognitive
he provides a footnote in an article Sam
heiress to the very simple claim quote
cultivating this quality of mind has
been shown to improve cognitive function
that's that's the quote from his status
his claim to being in the sciences to
being an extra The Guardian says his
claim to being a skeptic and so on it's
all built on his research on Buddhism
and Buddhist meditation and he cites a
study he cites a lab report that is from
my perspective deeply troubling very
obviously flawed laughable and that he's
either lying to his readers about or
that he's lying to himself about so
approximately 60 university students who
are positively interested in meditation
compared to a group of university
students who instead sit for the same
amount of time and listen to audio books
listen to a book on tape and in this
study if you read all the footnotes the
book on tape that was played to the
control group was the Hobbit by JRR
tolkien and it was the BBC radio version
of Tolkien stop that's that's the basis
for this claim Sam Harris is making and
he's an expert we have to treat him as
an expert we have to criticize myself
but if anyone in the world should be
able to back up this incredibly simple
claim this is like you know if you know
about cults built on faith healing when
they make a Reiki as an example of a
failing they make very simple
fundamental claims that the human body
has an invisible field around it and
this can be detected through touch prove
that come where's your sighted source
for that when did you even prove that
there is this field that can be detected
by human touch then we got to move for
us this is the most fundamental claim
and yet he doesn't have even one good
source on it
the only source he can reach for and
this is not at the beginning of his PhD
thesis this is many years after he's
finished his PhD thesis and
come a supposedly respectable expert in
this field on the basis of that PhD work
this is this is the best you can do what
were the tests that they performed with
these 60 students well the most
fundamental one for the claim of
cognitive function improving again that
should show up um you know if you give
people certain drugs like adderall you
can measure the change in cognitive
function for better and for worse for
better or for worse you tell me give
people adderall this isn't hard to prove
does adderall change cognitive function
it does it's not mysterious it shouldn't
be a religious concept this should be
science right well they had the
meditators attempt to memorize a
sequence of sixteen numbers so somebody
reads the numbers to the person and then
they try to recall as many the numbers
as possible okay and then they assign a
score for how well you did in memorizing
and repeating back the numbers okay now
the score assigned to the meditating
group was ten point eight eight and the
score assigned to the non meditating
group was ten point eight four this is
not even a rounding error this is the
same number and we're talking about an
average here of only sixty odd people
okay these are not such enormous numbers
of people on the test that this could
possibly be scientifically significant
so I've heard me statistically
significant more scientifically
significant now there are many other
avenues along which I have to criticize
this why would meditation why would the
cognitive difference be in your ability
to memorize repeat back the score
however there's a part B to this same
test which is that they then also
measured the same sequence of numbers
backwards how good or
bad were you at memorizing 16 numbers
this is referred to as the backward
digits fan okay so the same test it's
time with a different set of numbers
apparently it's the same numbers in
Reverse so these are two it's basically
two versions of the same quiz same test
of talkative cognitive ability all right
if you believe this is a meaningful test
of cognitive ability and that one the
the meditators did worse so you have one
test you have two tests that are
basically identical in terms of testing
cognitive ability and it's a tie between
meditators and non-meditators one and
the second case the scores were six
point five eight versus six point seven
two the people who didn't meditate had
better or cognitive function if you
believe this is a meaningful measure of
cognitive function and now again obvious
question is the Ximena full measure in
general of cognitive function you know
maybe it is for some things maybe if
you're measuring how people have
recovered brain function after a car
accident maybe this is an important
meaningful measure I'm not gonna say
this has no significance in cognitive
science field there are some important
research that kind that the degree of
mental functionality someone has after
you know they've had a traumatic brain
injury or something maybe their ability
to memorize a sequence of 60 numbers
maybe that matters but the type of
cognitive function you're supposedly
gaining through Buddhist meditation why
would this be meaningful and if it is
meaningful Sam Harris you're a charlatan
you cited this study as proof that
Buddhist meditation improves cognitive
function and you're lying just read the
study just read the study you cited as
your source it proves the opposite the
study involved approximately 60
University students University students
who expressed that they were interested
in learning meditation now that's
already very different from testing the
cognitive effects of meditation with a
group of people who don't believe in it
or group people some of whom may be
hostile to right
what's the difference do you think again
keep in mind all of these tests could
also be done with Christian prayer what
if you get a bunch of devout Catholics
and try to see whether or not certain
forms of Prayer improve their cognitive
function using these same tests that if
you're use to measure incredibly minor
differences in cognitive function for
college students who want meditation
that positive they're already motivated
they're already incentivized and they're
being paid for their time to come in and
try to try to do better on these tests
that are done before and after they a
minute 860 University students
positively inclined towards learning
meditation who want it to work don't you
think they'd be different than say
middle-aged Muslims who regard Buddhist
meditation really negatively really
skeptically but also with hostility you
know the religious concepts they feel
are you know something something like
the devil what if you add some
conservative Muslims some conservative
Protestants being put through this same
Buddhist meditation experiment do you
think you'd get the same outcomes and
let me tell you the outcomes just wait
we'll get to those outcomes get to what
it is they test it change it what if
what if you had some nihilistic atheists
score does not positively inclined to
don't take this kind of thing you don't
think you're already biasing the study
with the selection of this sample deeply
flawed source now when I first
discovered this and I read all the fine
print in this lab report this
peer-reviewed study he relies upon I
said further the implications of the nut
of the other of the other numbers in the
study seem baffling if they have any
validity at all the score assigned for
anger dropped from 4.0 to one point nine
one for the meditating students however
for the non-meditators the control group
it dropped from three point eight to one
point two
what really does this prove indicate or
even insinuate is meditation actually
less effective at reducing anger then
listening to junior are talking as an
audio book that's not a joke the control
group listen to The Hobbit instead of
meditating so again that's the evidence
presented in the study now if you think
that reducing anger improves cognitive
function it doesn't clearly his claim
must rest on this test of memorizing
numbers that have already discussed the
dish length which doesn't support its
claim being less angry after you
meditate doesn't really prove anything I
mean you've been sitting still it may
prove that it's just as effective City
so but this found it was actually less
effective at reducing anger then sitting
and listening to an audio book sitting
Alyssa Jo Tolkien you know now how anger
is actually defined and measured relies
on the so called Fryeburg mindfulness
inventory you can google that you can
look it up you can decide for yourself
if that is charlatanism or not many of
these tests are kind of meaningful in
some specific limited context and not in
others just like I was suggesting with
traumatic brain injury and certain tests
of intelligence I don't think you know I
mean if you measure an apple with a
meter stick it may not tell you what you
want to know are we really using
meaningful measurements here to begin
with I doubt it
the score assigned for confusion another
interesting thing to quantify drop from
6.9 to 25.46 for the meditators but for
the non-meditators the change was from
6.6 to only four point eight eight again
if these numbers prove anything should
we take these as indications of the
value of not meditating
for the meditators attention however
that may be quantified dropped from
eight point five to two point nine one
for the non-meditators the change was
from six point two eight to only two
point six the implications would be
baffling if we really wanted to take
this seriously as evidence of well
anything at all and why would we right
even if all of these tests did support
sam Harris's claim that buddhist
meditation improves cognitive function
like if the if the scores if the numbers
I just quoted to you were very different
with their they showed a stark
improvement a stark difference would
anyone look at this and say wow this
test shows a big increase in a cognitive
function that's his claims about
cognitive function no neither memorizing
a series of numbers nor having suddenly
less anger in these circumstances
none of that shows improve cognitive
function and on the issue of memorizing
numbers as mentioned there are some
mental exercises there arts there's math
training there's mathematical practice
and teaching you know you could have you
could spend the same amount of time
giving people kind of training that
would really improve their ability to
remember and make use of numbers in
their own head nobody's going to be
impressed by this there's no meaningful
connection between these exercises of
sitting and focusing on the sensation of
the air entering and exiting your
nostrils it's basically it's so-called
breathing meditation it's what it is
that they tested and these measures of
cognitive function but sam harris lied
to you
sam harris is a charlatan who even after
years of specialized research could not
back up this simple and fundamental
claim
if you want to know more there's an
earlier 22 minute video I made the link
is below I made it over a year ago I was
quite sick at the time it takes couple
minutes to get rolling but I watched
that video again before recording this
one if you give it a chance that still
was an excellent video that's full of
meaningful reflections on this and why
it matters
I say again this matters a lot to me it
matters a lot to Sam Harris in some ways
I think it should matter to both modern
Buddhism and modern skepticism to a
virus Yin